so somatic mutations are not the origin
of cancer how do we get cancer how does
it arise well this goes back as as was
said in the intro that warberg the
German scientist uh from the 19 20s 30s
he passed away in 1970 actually um but
he clearly showed that cancer arises
from chronic damage to cellular
respiration the way we get energy from
oxygen energy through fermentation
gradually compensates for insufficient
respiration fermentation is energy
without oxygen it's a very primitive
ancient form of generating energy cancer
cells continue to ferment glucose in the
presence of oxygen which is referred to
as the warberg effect and we call this
aerobic fermentation cells should not
ferment in the presence of oxygen cancer
cells continue to ferment in the
presence of
oxygen very
abnormal now uh there was a lot of
controversy about warber findings but we
filled in we discovered that uh uh
cancer cells also ferment an amino acid
glutamine glutamine is the most abundant
amino acid in our bloodstream the most
abundant amino acid in our body it's an
amino acid glutamine and this uh cancer
cells will ferment glutamine they can
burn glutamine in the absence of oxygen
for energy and we call this the Q effect
to make make sure it's different from
the warberg effect Q is the singular
letter that identifies glutamine in the
biochemist
U um profile so this is the missing link
in a warberg central Theory um that we
now know that cancer cells survive on
fermentation but they will F ferment
lactic acid from GL glucose and they'll
ferment succinic acid from glutamine so
the cancer cells are deriving their
energy from fermentation rather than
from uh oxidative respiration now the
important issue here is that enhanced
fermentation is the signature metabolic
Mal malady of volan cancer cells we've
looked into this so if you look at
Cancer all these cancer cells have
different mutations there's different
cell types all these kind of
heterogeneity but they're all fermenting
so the signature metabolic M malady is
fermentation driven by glucose and
glutamine it's and you'll come to
realize that if we target glucose and
glutamine we can manage the majority of
cancers so let's look at the evidence to
support wiberg's Central theory that
cancer is damaged respiration so this is
an El micrograph of a mitochondria
because these are tiny tiny organel in
the cytoplasm of the cell and you need
to use electron microscopy to really see
the structure of the organel so you can
see these nice Stripes you see here
through the normal mitochondrian and um
these are called christe and they
contain the lipids and proteins of the
electron transport chain that allows us
to generate ATP energy from the oxygen
that we breathe okay
so the chist a you see how beautiful the
structure is uh these are very
sophisticated organel uh they can
generate tremendous amounts of energy in
the presence of oxygen to keep all of
our tissues alive and our cell all brain
and our cells uh participatory in
metabolic homeostasis now this is a gleo
blastoma very deadly brain cancer I'll
talk more about that later but you can
see it's Hollow it's chryssis there's a
breakdown there's no cristate so this
organel is not going to be able to
generate energy because the structure is
abnormal and I'll show you more evidence
for this not just brain cancer here's an
example of breast cancer this is a uh
these are breast tumor cells and these
are normal um breast epithelial cells
and you can see the normal cell here has
the nice stripes the christe whereas the
the mitochondrian and the breast tumor
has these big holes these chryssis
abnormal chiste um this here CR see as
color rectal cancer uh you can see the
the cryistal these ghost mitochondria so
structure in biology the a fundamental
evolutionary concept of biology that you
can all that everyone should be able to
appreciate is structure determines
function structure determines function
if the structure of the organel is
abnormal the function of the organel
will be abnormal are you passionate
about the groundbreaking in heroic re
search of Dr Thomas Cipher on metabolic
therapy and cancer so are we that's why
we've created something special for you
in collaboration with Johnny rocker a
German book publisher and
translator introducing our collection of
meticulously crafted books that distill
the essence of Dr safe Reed's work dive
into the science and discoveries these
summary books are your gateway to
understanding the intricate world of
metabolic ketogenic therapy in a clear
concise and engaging way when whether
you're new to the subject or a seasoned
Enthusiast our books offer insights that
can change your life ready to explore
this transformative knowledge visit our
website at wwwc cancer Asam metabolic
disease.com to get your copy you can buy
the ebook there directly and the
paperbook via the provided links here's
the best part a portion of every
purchase goes directly to support Dr
Thomas safe Reed's groundbreaking
research that's why the direct ebook
purchase is the best option to donate as
much as possible you can see all of the
donations Mr rocker has already made at
www keto for
cancer.net that's right when you buy our
books you're not just investing in your
own knowledge you're also contributing
to the future of cancer research help us
make a
difference together we can drive change
and save lives so what I did and I don't
expect people to see this because it's
quite dense but these are all of the
major C cancers that we know of lung
cancer neur blood pancreatic ovarian
coloral breast whatever you know I went
through the literature and detailed in
all of these major cancers that
mitochondria were abnormal in structure
and function structure determines
function if the structure is abnormal
the function will be abnormal if the
mitochondria structure is abnormal the
function of that organel will be
abnormal that the role of that organel
is to generate energy through
respiration so if you can't generate
energy through respiration in order to
survive the the cell must ferment so
let's look at energy a little bit here
this is energy metabolism in normal
cells the glycolysis pathway breaks
glucose down to pyruvic acid or pyruvate
a 10 step this is an ancient pathway
that existed in all cells before oxygen
came into the atmosphere 2.5 billion
years ago so this is an ancient icient
pathway but it presents uh breaks down
the sugar glucose the pyruvate enters
the mitochondria and it's fully oxidized
in the kreb cycle named for Hans Krebs
also the TCA cycle citric acid cycle the
same names for the same thing and what
it does is it collects the energy from
the Sun that was in in the bonds of the
glucose molecule breaks the and these
bonds down captures the energy of the
Sun in these uh reducing equivalents
which then deliver their electrons to
the proteins in the chiste electron
transport chain oxida a phosphorilation
and you see this large starb burst here
ATP so the most of the energy coming in
our cells 89 to 90% energy is coming
from the full oxidation of glucose down
and the waste products are CO2 and water
okay so this is the way most of all
healthy cells in our body get majority
of their energy we all breathe air uh we
generate energy from the foods that we
eat we break it down the foods that we
eat embody the biology of the sun the
sun the sun actually creates this we
break those bonds down recapture the
energy of the Sun in in respiration and
we get the majority of our energy here
now you don't see these small star
bursts here these um this is the way all
cells got energy before oxygen came into
the atmosphere these little ancient
Pathways you can get they still they're
still there they still present in modern
cells it's just that they're very very
much less energy most of the energy now
is coming from respiration now let's
compare this with what we see in a
cancer cell so now immediately the first
thing you see is the starburst is
somewhere else it's here it's here from
a different source and it's also here in
the
cytoplasm so the ancient pathways are
now producing the majority of the energy
the oxidative phosphorilation is not
producing the energy because the organ
the chiste are gone so you're not going
to get the energy here so the cell the
cancer cell falls back on these ancient
Pathways that existed before oxygen came
into the atmosphere the interesting
thing is when they do that they become
completely growth disregulated and the
waste products lactic acid and succinic
acid acidify the micro environment of
the tumor cell making the spread of the
tumor cell through the tissues uh uh
much greater because of all the waste
that's now creating acidification which
doesn't occur in the normal cells you
don't get any of this so the cancer cell
is simply falling back on Ancient
Pathways acidifying the micro
environment and this is driven these
fuels are driven here's glucose and
what's driving here is the glutamine the
glutamine the amino acid glutamine is
driving this part Pro part and the uh
sugar glucose is driving this part so
the abnormal energy of the cancer cell
is being driven by glucose and
glutamine not by oxygen because they
lost that ability now this is more
complicated but this is the uh uh
structural uh example of what we're
talking about uh here's glycolysis the
ancient pathway of glycolysis and
glutaminolysis
um and uh what's happening here uh
glucose is metabolized to lactic acid
which acidifies the micro
environment um but very little ATP is
coming here I I'll I can explain if
anybody's interested here's the
glutamine the amino acid it comes
through a series of Pathways uh and
right here boom here's the energy coming
from glutamine so glutamine is
generating the majority of the energy
the oxygen cancer cells do take in
oxygen but they're not linked to ATP
production but rather to the production
of R Ross which are reactive radicals
that damage DNA and RNA and actually
cause a tremendous amount of damage so
uh and then succinate is dumped out to
acidify the micro environment lactic
acid is dumped out so the cancer cell is
driven by by glucose and glutamine
producing energy by an ancient pathway
also producing reactive oxygen species
uh causing a tremendous amount of damage
in the micro environment so here's our
diagram uh to encapsulate how we link
the Hallmarks of cancer according to the
gene Theory and Hanahan and Weinberg all
of these Hallmarks here on the right can
all be linked back to damage to the
mitochondria so let's look carefully at
the origin of cancer so everyone we call
certain chemicals as carcinogens like in
Smoke uh there's a lot of carcinogens in
in cigarette and tobacco smoke then we
know that that can damage mitochondria
carcinogens damage the mitochondria
people fear radiation because radiation
can cause cancer uh by damaging
mitochondria intermittent hypoxia like
sleep apnea and occlusion of a blood
vessel or something can create
intermittent
hypoxia which will damage the
mitochondria okay um systemic
inflammation can damage the mitochondria
um obesity uh is linked to systemic
inflammation um
obesity excuse me is the second most uh
behind smoke cigarette smoke is the most
provocative agent for damaging
mitochondria uh rare rare inherited
mutations like the braa one gene you
heard about Angelina Jolie with the braa
one having you know breasts and ovaries
removed or what have you a lot of women
a lot of people many not everyone but
some people do this um so these
mutations are risk factors they they are
risk factors because they damage the
respiration all of these provocative
agents are riskk factors oncogenic
viruses like papiloma and hepatitis
they' damaged the respiration also age
the older you get the more likely you
can have a a damage to your respiration
leading to um A disruption of oxidative
phosphorilation and this had been known
for many years this was called the
oncogenic Paradox because no one could
figure out how all of these disperate
risk factors could cause cancer uh
through a common pathophys phological
mechanism and if those of you who read
the book emperor of all maladies by Sid
muker which was on the New York Times
bestseller list for many years and was
the received the pit Sur prize uh for
the for the book um he struggles with
this he had no idea as mookery in the
book how all these different provocative
agents could can could cause cancer
through a common pathophysiological
mechanism and we we Define we we solved
the par the Paradox uh we we know that
all of these provocative agents will
cause reactive oxygen species
R and this these Ros are
carcinogenic and mutagenic so the Ros
cause the mutations in the nucleus all
right so the mutations are an effect
they're not the cause they're a
downstream effect of mitochondrial
damage but when the mitochondri can't
produce energy through oxidative
phosphorilation they upregulate
fermentation
through substrate level phosphorilation
and what happens is what is upregulating
SLP fermentation and it is the enogen so
the enogen are facilitators of the
fermentation process they allow the cell
to take in more glucose and glutamine so
um when you can't breathe the ter the if
if a cell doesn't die right away but
it's chronic it's a chronic progression
over time the cell gradually upregulates
fermentation you get the warberg effect
and mitochondrial fermentation okay and
now you can link all of the Hallmarks of
cancer that people think are are really
important are all Downstream effects of
damage to the mitochondria so we're
spending millions of dollars and
spending massive amounts of scientific
research on on these hallm marks that
all can be linked back to damage to the
respiration and now that we know this we
there are very clear Ways by which we
can solve this cancer problem quite
effectively
[Music]
n